---
layout: post
title: 10 Things I learnt from Undergrad [Personal]
comments: True
---

The four years that I spent on seeking undergraduate level education taught me a lot. Many life lessons, ways to adjust, corrections and of course remorse. Although, these learnings may be to the self, the 'common undergrad' would relate to many. 

I write this after having enough to introspect about the time I invested in seeking an undergraduate degree. *Disclaimer: If this sounds like a rant to you, then you are more than capable of writing ten  points (or even a book possibly) like this post.* 

#####1. Speak up.
I found myself at a stage where people around me stopped pampering me like before. I had to speak/ask to get things done. This was new. I now realise that not everybody had answers to all their questions back then. I didn't like to engage myself in an uncomfortable conversation with my parents. Hence, I avoided it. Many times silence is misunderstood for 'all is well.' Keep parents/relatives (if you cared)/friends in-loop. Communicating my difficulties was not easy and became harder over time. I later understood that it is our prerogative to speak ourselves out of trouble. Speaking to people who have recently graduated is a lagniappe. They can indicate the highs, lows and accident zones. Working on issues together, can yield pleasing outcomes.

#####2. Have some alone time. 
This is when the remorse kicks itself in. And it is not a good feeling. But, I learnt the hard way that when I didn't put in adequate time to think through issues (be it small or big), I ended up acting hastily. This is when you play ['Kaun Banega Crorepati'](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaun_Banega_Crorepati) with your brain. Don't play to win, play to realise that there are a lot of issues to be worked on. Let the mind games begin!

#####3. No replacement for fun with friends.
Have movie/sitcom marathons. Hang out at joints and eat outs. Laugh! Play pranks. Take long drives safely. Cut class. Gossip over the phone (and call it knowledge transfer!). Put all this and more in for(i=firstDay; i>=lastDay; i++). Ensure this doesn't become a indefinite recursive loop. *ProTip:* Have a go-to friend who writes all his/her notes and is more meticulous. I have been fortunate to have such people through school and college.

#####4. Read from books and not e-books (as much as possible)
Be wise. Studying from a laptop don't happened until you are really focused and serious about learning something out of it. What is more dangerous is having a e-book open in a browser. Just doesn't work. After sundown, we will ultimately realise that we have been reeling off Facebook, Twitter or even better YouTube. I have been in these situations and believe me, a solid book would do greater good. 

#####5. Stay street smart.
Each class and staff have their own requirements to successfully complete their course. Try to understand this and play along. Some staff may let you off the hook, but do not assume otherwise. Stay friendly. This is a charm of a trick that many in class do get. Also, learn to get work done with ease. Prioritising tasks is essential. Avoid reinventing the wheel. 

#####6. Develop character along the way.
The undergraduate education here, doesn't allow you to act in character. You are instucted asked to be someone or somehow. Understanding this is crucial as you will be expected to be a man/woman (with responsibilities and the whole nine yards) once you're out.  No joke, this is difficult. Few years later regret will catch up for not developing this skill of personality.

#####7. Prepare to Fail.
This is something that you may face once, twice or multiple time. I learnt that it is okay to fail. How we perceive the failure and get back is rather more important. The learning we take from failure is critical in staying smart. Never ever give up. The fact that I 'gave in' stayed longer that why I 'gave in.' Stick to your guns. At times, failure will lead you realising goals better. 

#####8. Broaden your spectrum. 
Don't limit yourself to college and its routines. Volunteer somewhere. Travel. Do stuff that you are not expected off (purely in the good sense). I had and still have [IEEE](http://bcp.ieeebangalore.org/). New friends, resourceful professionals and newer kind of fun. These activities will have more traction after you leave college. Friends from college will part eventually or may stay, but these people/organisations are everywhere just like the www. Try community service. It helps in recognising that you are indeed blessed. Read about current developments in your field of study. 

#####9. Quit blaming the system.
I would have spent a good amount of time on this particular activity that I'm not proud of now. I realised that, being a product of the system with an intention to change it, helps than trying to be an outlier and remonstrate. At the least, you require a certain qualification to be heard. Make the best out of what is available and then make it better for others. Seriously, this is a futile task.

#####10. Hope. 
'It is the quintessential human delusion, simultaneously the source of your greatest strength, and your greatest weakness.' - The Architect from Matrix Reloaded. Being optimistic helps in keeping your morale high. Believe in hope. Have faith.

I have refrained from stating out facts like Hard Work, etc..., as I'm sure you would have heard enough of it already. I'll leave that to the family. I felt one of [Robin Sharma's](http://www.robinsharma.com/) quote is appropriate here, 'MASTERY AND WORLD-CLASS IS SO MUCH MORE ABOUT PRACTICE, DISCIPLINE, DEVOTION, DEDICATION, GRIT AND RELENTLESSNESS.'